Capabilities 2021 (#2398)
HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org: src/content/en/2021/capabilities.md

```js
const handle = window.showDirectoryPicker();
```

The File System Access API is only available on Chromium-based browsers and desktop systems. Fortunately, the web platform offers fallback approaches to provide similar functionality on mobile devices and other browsers as well: With the `input[type=file]` control, it’s possible to give a web application access to the binary contents of a file. The `a[download]` mechanism allows users to download a dynamically generated file to their Downloads folder. Developers can also use Thomas Steiner’s library [browser-fs-access](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/browser-fs-access) that uses File System Access API if present and otherwise falls back to the alternative implementation.

Out of all 6,286,373 desktop and 7,491,840 mobile websites in the HTTP Archive, the File System Access API is used on 29 desktop and 23 mobile sites. Examples for those sites are the image editor [Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com/), which allows you to sketch diagrams in a hand-drawn look and save them to the disk. Another example is [CorelDRAW.app](https://coreldraw.app/), a web version of the image editing software CorelDRAW.

### Async Clipboard API

> The [Async Clipboard API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Clipboard_API) allows you to read and write data from or to the clipboard. Due to its asynchronous nature, it enables use cases like scaling down an image while pasting it—all without blocking the UI. It replaces less capable APIs like `document.execCommand()` that were previously used to interact with the clipboard.

Reviewer: I think it's the em-dash?!

> The [Async Clipboard API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Clipboard_API) allows you to read and write data from or to the clipboard. Due to its asynchronous nature, it enables use cases like scaling down an image while pasting it—all without blocking the UI. It replaces less capable APIs like `document.execCommand()` that were previously used to interact with the clipboard.

Author: GitHub tells me the "suggestion is invalid because no changes were made to the code"…

---
#See https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/wiki/Authors'-Guide#metadata-to-add-at-the-top-of-your-chapters
title: Capabilities

> description: Capabilities give web apps access to hardware interfaces, enhance web-based productivity apps, and more.

Reviewer 2: Can we start this in the standard way:

```suggestion
description: description: Capabilities chapter of the 2020 Web Almanac covering brand-new, powerful web platform APIs that give web apps access to hardware interfaces, enhance web-based productivity apps, and more.
```

authors: [christianliebel]
reviewers: [tomayac, hemanth]

> analysts: [tomayac]

Reviewer 2: Reminder to copy these people's details to `src/config/2021.json` as part of this PR. All were involved last year so should just be a copy and paste from that and an update to the roles.

editors: []
translators: []

> results: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1b4moteB9EiLYkH1Ln9qfi1tnU-E4N2UQ87uayWytDKw/

Reviewer 2: Need a discussion id here (not assigned yet - see ): #2414 

```suggestion
discuss: ????
results: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1b4moteB9EiLYkH1Ln9qfi1tnU-E4N2UQ87uayWytDKw/
```

christianliebel_bio: Christian Liebel is a consultant at <a hreflang="en" href="https://thinktecture.com">Thinktecture</a>, supporting clients from various business areas in implementing great web applications. He is a Microsoft MVP for Developer Technologies, Google GDE for Web/Capabilities and Angular, and participates in the W3C Web Applications Working Group.
featured_quote: Capabilities are new web platform APIs that unlock entirely new use cases for web applications.
featured_stat_1: 9%
featured_stat_label_1: Desktop web sites use the Web Share API
featured_stat_2: 8.25%
featured_stat_label_2: Mobile sites use the Async Clipboard API
featured_stat_3: 11
featured_stat_label_3: Mobile sites use Declarative Link Capturing
---

> ## Capabilities

Reviewer 2: The H1 heading will automatically be added so should start this with:

```md
## Introduction
```
and end it with:

```md
## Conclusion
```

So I think all your headings might be 1 level too deep?

Capabilities are new web platform APIs that unlock entirely new use cases for web applications. Those new APIs are essential for [Progressive Web Apps (PWA)](../pwa), a web-based application model. A PWA is a web app that users can install to their system. PWAs run even offline and launch quickly. To integrate with the underlying operating system, PWAs can only use web platform APIs. While browsers have already exposed some lower-level features to the web (e.g., geolocation, gamepad, or webcam access), many APIs were still missing or were clumsy to use (e.g., file system or clipboard access).

> The [Capabilities Project](https://www.chromium.org/teams/web-capabilities-fugu) (codename Fugu) is a joint effort by Microsoft, Intel, Google, and other Chromium contributors. It tries to bridge the gap between platform-specific applications and web apps by designing and implementing new powerful web platform APIs in a secure and privacy-preserving manner. As capabilities unlock more and more use cases, they lay the path for entire new application categories to finally make the shift to the web (e.g., IDEs, image editors, or office applications). Over the last two years, the focus for the Fugu team has been on capabilities for desktop productivity applications and hardware-related APIs. This chapter briefly introduces several new capabilities and analyzes how many different desktop and mobile websites use them. As capabilities are particularly interesting for app-like websites, their relative usage is comparatively low. This is why absolute website numbers are used in this chapter. For each capability, there will be a demo website or app that makes use of it.

Reviewer 2: We've actually switched to using HTML links for external links so we can add a `hreflang="en"` so the translations get a little `(en)` symbol when a translation doesn't exist:

```suggestion
The <a hreflang="en" href="https://www.chromium.org/teams/web-capabilities-fugu">Capabilities Project</a> (codename Fugu) is a joint effort by Microsoft, Intel, Google, and other Chromium contributors. It tries to bridge the gap between platform-specific applications and web apps by designing and implementing new powerful web platform APIs in a secure and privacy-preserving manner. As capabilities unlock more and more use cases, they lay the path for entire new application categories to finally make the shift to the web (e.g., IDEs, image editors, or office applications). Over the last two years, the focus for the Fugu team has been on capabilities for desktop productivity applications and hardware-related APIs. This chapter briefly introduces several new capabilities and analyzes how many different desktop and mobile websites use them. As capabilities are particularly interesting for app-like websites, their relative usage is comparatively low. This is why absolute website numbers are used in this chapter. For each capability, there will be a demo website or app that makes use of it.
```

Note wikipedia and MDN links don't need this and can use markdown as we pick up the fact they have `en` in their URLs, so can continue to use markdown link syntax for them.

https://github.com/HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org/blob/78ea8ea14f748a9f88d22cfcb48700eaf4bc8ced/src/static/css/almanac.css#L1559-L1587

Author: @tunetheweb How to deal with the `[Progressive Web Apps (PWA)](../pwa)` link? Does that need to be an HTML link too? I converted the other links (except the MDN ones).

Reviewer 2: We leave internal links as they are. In the overly optimistic hope that they will be translated to every language 😁

Technically the link (since it is relative) is to the translated version, but in reality it will redirected to English most of the time, since a translated version will often not exist. 😞

Author: Cool, thanks!

#### Write Access
The Async Clipboard API offers two methods to copy data to the clipboard: The shorthand method [`writeText()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Clipboard/writeText) takes plain text as an argument which the browser then copies to the clipboard. The [`write()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Clipboard/write) method takes an array of clipboard items that could contain arbitrary data. Browsers can decide to only implement certain data formats. The Clipboard API specification specifies a [list of mandatory data types](https://www.w3.org/TR/clipboard-apis/#mandatory-data-types-x) browsers must support as a minimum, including plain text, HTML, URI lists, and PNG images.

```js
await navigator.clipboard.writeText('hello world');

const blob = new Blob(['hello world'], { type: 'text/plain' });
await navigator.clipboard.write([
  new ClipboardItem({
    [blob.type]: blob,
  }),
]);
```

#### Read Access

> Similar to copying data to the clipboard, there are two methods to paste data back from the clipboard: First, another [shorthand method called `readText()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Clipboard/readText) that returns plain text from the clipboard. Using the [`read()` method](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Clipboard/read), you access all items in the clipboard in the data formats supported by the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to copying data to the clipboard, there are two methods to paste data back from the clipboard: First, another shorthand method called  [`readText()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Clipboard/readText) that returns plain text from the clipboard. Using the [`read()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Clipboard/read) method, you access all items in the clipboard in the data formats supported by the browser.
```

```js
const item = await navigator.clipboard.readText();
const items = await navigator.clipboard.read();
```

The browser may show a permission prompt or a different UI for privacy reasons before granting the website access to the clipboard contents. The Async Clipboard API is available in Chrome, Edge, and Safari. Firefox only supports the `writeText()` method.

With 560,359 (8.91%) desktop and 618,062 (8.25%) mobile sites, the Async Clipboard API (`writeText()` method) is one of the most used Fugu APIs. The `write()` method is used on 1,180 desktop and 1,227 mobile sites. The commercial website [Clipping Magic](https://clippingmagic.com/) allows you to remove the background of an image with the help of an AI algorithm. Just paste an image from the clipboard, and the website will remove its background.

### Web Share API

> The [Web Share API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Navigator/share) allows you to share text, a URL, or files from a website or web application with other applications, e.g., mail clients or messengers. To do so, call the [`navigator.share()` method](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Navigator/share). It takes an object with the data to share with another application. The browser then opens the native share sheet, where the user can select the target application from. The method returns a promise that resolves in case the content was successfully shared; otherwise, it will be rejected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Web Share API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Navigator/share) allows you to share text, a URL, or files from a website or web application with other applications, e.g., mail clients or messengers. To do so, call the [`navigator.share()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Navigator/share) method. It takes an object with the data to share with another application. The browser then opens the built-in share sheet, where the user can select the target application from. The method returns a promise that resolves in case the content was successfully shared; otherwise, it will be rejected.
```

```js
await navigator.share({
  files: picturesArray,
  title: 'Holiday pictures',
  text: 'Our holiday in the French Alps'
})
``` 

> The Web Share API is supported by Safari (iOS, macOS), and Chrome and Edge (Windows, Chrome OS). It’s currently a [Working Draft](https://www.w3.org/TR/web-share/) at the Web Applications Working Group. This is one of the first stages of the track to becoming a W3C Recommendation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Web Share API is supported by Safari (iOS, macOS), and Chrome and Edge (Windows, Chrome OS). It's currently a [Working Draft](https://www.w3.org/TR/web-share/) at the Web Applications Working Group. This is one of the first stages of the track to becoming a W3C Recommendation.
```

### URL Handlers and Declarative Link Capturing
The last two productivity-related capabilities described in this chapter are URL Handlers and Declarative Link Capturing, additional methods for even deeper integration with the operating system.

#### URL Handling
With the help of [URL Handling](https://web.dev/pwa-url-handler/), PWAs can register themselves as handlers for certain URL schemes upon installation, e.g., for `https://*.example.com`. When the user opens a URL that matches this scheme, the installed PWA will open instead of a new browser tab. URL Handling is an extension of the [Web Application Manifest](https://www.w3.org/TR/appmanifest/), a file that contains metadata for web applications. To register for URL schemes, you have to add the `url_handlers` property to your manifest. This property takes an array containing objects with an `origin` property.

```json
{
  "url_handlers": [{
    "origin": "https://*.example.com"
  }]
}
```

> If you want to register for origins other than your web app’s origin, you need to [verify your ownership of them](https://web.dev/pwa-url-handler/#the-web-app-origin-association-file). The capability is at a relatively early stage: It’s only supported on Chrome and Edge on the desktop. URL Handling is currently available as an Origin Trial. This means that the capability is not generally available yet. Instead, developers need to register for an Origin Trial token first and deliver this token along with their website to use this capability. You can find more information in the [Origin Trials Guide for Web Developers](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/OriginTrials/blob/gh-pages/developer-guide.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to register for origins other than your web app's origin, you need to [verify your ownership of them](https://web.dev/pwa-url-handler/#the-web-app-origin-association-file). The capability is at a relatively early stage: It's only supported on Chrome and Edge on the desktop. URL Handling is currently available as an Origin Trial. This means that the capability is not generally available yet. Instead, developers need to register for an Origin Trial token first and deliver this token along with their website to use this capability. You can find more information in the [Origin Trials Guide for Web Developers](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/OriginTrials/blob/gh-pages/developer-guide.md).
```

44 desktop and 41 mobile websites make use of URL Handling. For example, the Pinterest PWA registers itself as a URL handler for the different Pinterest origins (e.g., `*.pinterest.com` and `*.pinterest.de`) on installation.

#### Declarative Link Capturing
With the help of [Declarative Link Capturing](https://web.dev/declarative-link-capturing/), you can further control how PWAs should behave when the user opens them. For instance, an office application may want to open another window for a new document, while a music player wants to keep its single window open. Therefore, Declarative Link Capturing defines three different modes:

1. `none` does not capture the link at all (the default)
2. `new-client` opens a new window for the PWA
3. `existing-client-navigate`  navigates an existing client to the new URL or opens a new window if no client exists

> Declarative Link Capturing also is an extension of the Web Application Manifest. To use it, you need to add the `capture_links` property to your manifest. This property takes a string or an array of strings matching the three modes from above. If you use an array, the browser will fall back to the next entry if it doesn’t support a particular mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Declarative Link Capturing also is an extension of the Web Application Manifest. To use it, you need to add the `capture_links` property to your manifest. This property takes a string or an array of strings matching the three modes from above. If you use an array, the browser will fall back to the next entry if it doesn't support a particular mode.
```

```json
{
  "capture_links": [
    "existing-client-navigate",
    "new-client",
    "none"
  ]
}
```

> This capability is at an early stage as well. It is only supported on Chrome OS. Currently, 36 desktop sites and 11 mobile sites use this capability, for example, [Periodex](https://periodex.co/), a PWA showing the periodic table of elements. This app uses the `capture_links` configuration as shown in the listing above: If supported, the browser should reuse the existing window, otherwise, open a new one, and if that’s not supported, it should behave as normal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This capability is at an early stage as well. It is only supported on Chrome OS. Currently, 36 desktop sites and 11 mobile sites use this capability, for example, [Periodex](https://periodex.co/), a PWA showing the periodic table of elements. This app uses the `capture_links` configuration as shown in the listing above: If supported, the browser should reuse the existing window, otherwise, open a new one, and if that's not supported, it should behave as normal.
```

### Hardware APIs
The next set of capabilities focuses on hardware-related APIs. In Chromium-based browsers, there are many APIs to access hardware interfaces, including but not limited to USB, Bluetooth, and serial devices. Furthermore, the Generic Sensor API allows you to read from device sensors. All capabilities discussed in this section are only available on Chromium-based browsers and on systems where the respective hardware interface or sensor is present.

#### Web USB API

> The [Web USB API](https://web.dev/usb/) allows developers to access USB devices without any drivers or third-party applications. For instance, this capability is interesting for firmware updaters that developers otherwise would have to implement as separate native apps for different platforms. You need to call the `navigator.usb.requestDevice()` method to access USB devices. It takes an object which defines filters for the list of all connected USB devices. You need to specify the `vendorId` at least. The browser shows a device picker where the user can choose a matching device. From there, you can begin a device session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Web USB API](https://web.dev/usb/) allows developers to access USB devices without any drivers or third-party applications. For instance, this capability is interesting for firmware updates that developers otherwise would have to implement as separate platform-specific apps for different platforms. You need to call the `navigator.usb.requestDevice()` method to access USB devices. It takes an object which defines filters for the list of all connected USB devices. You need to specify the `vendorId` at least. The browser shows a device picker where the user can choose a matching device. From there, you can begin a device session.
```

```js
try {
  const device = await navigator.usb.requestDevice({ filters: [{ vendorId: 0x8086 }] });
  console.log(device.productName);
  console.log(device.manufacturerName);
} catch (err) {
  console.log(err);
}
```

> The API is generally available on Chromium-based browsers since version 61. 182 desktop and 155 mobile sites use this API, for example, the PWA [Vysor](https://app.vysor.io/#/) that allows you to mirror the screen of an Android or iOS device—all without installing any additional software on your computer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API is generally available on Chromium-based browsers since version 61. 182 desktop and 155 mobile sites use this API, for example, the PWA [Vysor](https://app.vysor.io/#/) that allows you to mirror the screen of an Android or iOS device—all without installing any additional software on your computer.
```

Author: GitHub tells me the "suggestion is invalid because no changes were made to the code"…

The [Web Bluetooth API](https://web.dev/bluetooth/) allows you to communicate with nearby Bluetooth Low Energy devices using the Generic Attribute Profile (GATT). To find a matching device, call the `navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice()` method. In the following example, the list of Bluetooth devices is filtered by whether they offer a battery service or not. The browser shows a device picker where the user can choose a Bluetooth device. Afterward, you can connect to the remote device and gather the data.

```js
try {
  const device = await navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice({ filters: [{ services: ['battery_service'] }] });
  console.log(device.name);
} catch (err) {
  console.log(err);
}
```

The API is generally available on Chromium-based browsers on Chrome OS, Android, macOS, and Windows starting from version 56. On Linux, the API is provided behind a flag. 71 desktop and 45 mobile sites make use of this capability. For instance, the [Brewfather](https://web.brewfather.app/) PWA targeted at home-brewers allows them to send a beer recipe wirelessly over to a Bluetooth-enabled brewing system. Again, all without installing any third-party software.

#### Web Serial API

> The [Web Serial API](https://web.dev/serial/) allows you to connect with serial devices such as microcontrollers. To do so, call the `navigator.serial.requestPort()` method. You can optionally pass in a method to filter the device list. The browser shows a device picker where the user can choose a device. Next, you can open the connection by calling the port’s `open()` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Web Serial API](https://web.dev/serial/) allows you to connect with serial devices such as microcontrollers. To do so, call the `navigator.serial.requestPort()` method. You can optionally pass in a method to filter the device list. The browser shows a device picker where the user can choose a device. Next, you can open the connection by calling the port's `open()` method.
```

```js
try {
  const port = await navigator.serial.requestPort();
  await port.open({ baudRate: 9600 });
} catch (err) {
  console.log(err);
}
```

> This capability is relatively new, as it shipped with Chromium 89 in March 2021. Currently, 15 desktop and 14 mobile sites use Web Serial API, including the [Duino App](https://duino.app/) that allows you to develop programs for Arduino and ESP microcontrollers right in your browser. They are compiled on a remote server and then uploaded to a connected board via the Web Serial API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This capability is relatively new, as it shipped with Chromium 89 in March 2021. Currently, 15 desktop and 14 mobile sites use the Web Serial API, including the [Duino App](https://duino.app/) that allows you to develop programs for Arduino and ESP microcontrollers right in your browser. They are compiled on a remote server and then uploaded to a connected board via the Web Serial API.
```

#### Generic Sensor API

> Finally, the [Generic Sensor API](https://web.dev/generic-sensor/) allows you to read sensor data from the device’s sensors, such as the accelerometer, gyroscope, or orientation sensor. To access a sensor, you create a new instance of a sensor class, e.g., `Accelerometer`. The constructor takes a configuration object with the requested frequency. By attaching to the `onreading` and `onerror` events, you can get notified for updated sensor values, or errors respectively. Finally, you need to start the reading by calling the `start()` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the [Generic Sensor API](https://web.dev/generic-sensor/) allows you to read sensor data from the device's sensors, such as the accelerometer, gyroscope, or orientation sensor. To access a sensor, you create a new instance of a sensor class, e.g., `Accelerometer`. The constructor takes a configuration object with the requested frequency. By attaching to the `onreading` and `onerror` events, you can get notified for updated sensor values, or errors respectively. Finally, you need to start the reading by calling the `start()` method.
```

```js
try {
  const accelerometer = new Accelerometer({ frequency: 10 });
  accelerometer.onerror = (event) => {
    console.log(event);
  };
  accelerometer.onreading = (e) => {
    console.log(e);
  };
  accelerometer.start();
} catch (err) {
  console.log(err);
}
```

> The capability is supported by Chromium browsers starting from version 67. The relative orientation sensor is used by 824 desktop and 831 mobile sites, the linear acceleration sensor by 257 desktop and 237 mobile sites, and the gyroscope by 36 desktop and 22 mobile sites. An example application that uses all three of them is [VDO.Ninja](https://obs.ninja/), the former OBS Ninja. This software allows you to remotely connect with video broadcasting software such as OBS. The app allows the connected broadcasting software to read sensor data from the device.  For example, to capture a smartphone’s movement when streaming virtual reality content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The capability is supported by Chromium browsers starting from version 67. The relative orientation sensor is used by 824 desktop and 831 mobile sites, the linear acceleration sensor by 257 desktop and 237 mobile sites, and the gyroscope by 36 desktop and 22 mobile sites. An example application that uses all three of them is [VDO.Ninja](https://obs.ninja/), the former OBS Ninja. This software allows you to remotely connect with video broadcasting software such as OBS. The app allows the connected broadcasting software to read sensor data from the device. For example, to capture a smartphone's movements when streaming virtual reality content.
```

> ### Sites using most capabilities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Sites using the most capabilities
```

> The analysis also identified the websites using the most capabilities from the HTTP Archive data set. The crawler is capable of identifying 30 Fugu APIs in total.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The analysis also identified the websites using the most capabilities from the HTTP Archive data set. The detection script is capable of identifying 30 Fugu APIs in total.
```

> 1. The number one site is [whatwebcando.today](https://whatwebcando.today/), which uses 28 capabilities. It showcases different HTML5 device integration APIs by providing a live demo for every capability. Naturally, the number of used APIs is very high. In the result set, a similar site called [whatpwacando.today](https://whatpwacando.today/)  showcases PWA capabilities and uses eight APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The number one site is [whatwebcando.today](https://whatwebcando.today/), which uses 28 capabilities. It showcases different HTML5 device integration APIs by providing a live demo for every capability. Naturally, the number of used APIs is very high. In the result set, a similar site called [whatpwacando.today](https://whatpwacando.today/) showcases PWA capabilities and uses eight APIs.
```

> 2. The [PolisNotis](https://polisnotis.se/) PWA shows police notices in Sweden. It uses ten APIs, including the Declarative Link Capturing API to define that the PWA should always open a new window when clicking a PWA-related link. The Web Share API is used in the source code, but the sharing functionality is not exposed to the UI.
> 3. The website [System Scanner](https://system-scanner.net/) uses nine APIs: It shows an overview of the system information exposed by the browser, including sensor information provided by the Generic Sensor API.
> 4. Eight sites use eight Fugu APIs: One of them is the aforementioned [Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com/), an online drawing tool for creating drawings in a hand-drawn style. As a traditional productivity app, it benefits from the new capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The [PolisNotis](https://polisnotis.se/) PWA shows police notices in Sweden. It uses ten APIs, including the Declarative Link Capturing API to define that the PWA should always open a new window when clicking a PWA-related link. The Web Share API is used in the source code, but the sharing functionality is not exposed to the UI. The app also uses the Badging API to alert the user via the app icon if there is a new notice.
1. The website [System Scanner](https://system-scanner.net/) uses nine APIs: It shows an overview of the system information exposed by the browser, including sensor information provided by the Generic Sensor API.
1. Eight sites use eight Fugu APIs: One of them is the aforementioned [Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com/), an online drawing tool for creating drawings in a hand-drawn style. As a traditional productivity app, it benefits from the new capabilities.
```

> The results also include sites that aren’t proactively using the APIs. For example, some sites ship library code that could theoretically access the capabilities. Some sites check for the presence of Fugu APIs to determine the user’s browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The results also include sites that aren't proactively using the APIs. For example, some sites ship library code that could theoretically access the capabilities. Some sites check for the presence of Fugu APIs to determine the user’s browser.
```

### Conclusion

> Capabilities help move the web forward by unlocking more and more use cases for developers. As this chapter shows, developers use the new web platform APIs to build powerful applications. In contrast to their native counterparts, those applications don’t need to be installed to the system and don’t require any additional third-party runtimes or plug-ins to work. They run on any platform that can run a powerful browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Capabilities help move the web forward by unlocking more and more use cases for developers. As this chapter shows, developers use the new web platform APIs to build powerful applications. In contrast to their platform-specific counterparts, those applications don't necessarily need to be installed to the system and don't require any additional third-party runtimes or plug-ins to work. They run on any platform that can run a powerful browser.
```

> One example of this concept working is the Visual Studio Code IDE. This application has always been web-based, but it still relied on native application wrappers like Electron. Thanks to capabilities like the File System Access API, Microsoft was able to release the application as a browser application ([vscode.dev](https://vscode.dev)) in October 2021. Almost all IDE features work here, except access to the terminal, since there is no capability for this yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One example of this concept working is the Visual Studio Code IDE. This application has always been web-based, but it still relied on platform-specific application wrappers like Electron. Thanks to capabilities like the File System Access API, Microsoft was able to release the application as a browser application ([vscode.dev](https://vscode.dev)) in October 2021. Almost all IDE features work here, except access to the terminal, since there is no capability for this yet.
```

Please note that most of the APIs presented here are so-called incubations. Unless noted, they are not (yet) W3C Recommendations, i.e., official web standards. Instead, these APIs are being worked on in the Web Platform Incubator Community Group (WICG), where browser vendors and developers can discuss new features. Some APIs have already shipped in several browsers; others are only available on Chromium-based ones. These browsers include Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Opera, Brave, or Samsung Internet. Please note that vendors of Chromium-based browsers can choose to disable specific capabilities, so not all APIs may be available in all browsers based on Chromium. Some capabilities may also only be available after activating a flag in the browser settings.

## File System Access API

> The first productivity-related API is the [File System Access API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/File_System_Access_API). Web apps could already open files from the file system via `input[type=file]`: In a file picker, the user can choose one or more files to give the web application access to. Also, they could already save files to the Downloads folder via `a[download]`. The File System Access API adds support for additional use cases: Opening and modifying directories, saving files to a location specified by the user, and overwriting files that were opened by them. It is also possible to persist file handles to IndexedDB to allow for continued (permission-gated) access, even after a page reload. In particular, the API does not grant random access to the file system and certain system folders are blocked by default.

Reviewer: We could link to https://web.dev/browser-fs-access/#the-traditional-way-of-dealing-with-files where I have explained this in great detail.

> The first productivity-related API is the [File System Access API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/File_System_Access_API). Web apps could already open files from the file system via `input[type=file]`: In a file picker, the user can choose one or more files to give the web application access to. Also, they could already save files to the Downloads folder via `a[download]`. The File System Access API adds support for additional use cases: Opening and modifying directories, saving files to a location specified by the user, and overwriting files that were opened by them. It is also possible to persist file handles to IndexedDB to allow for continued (permission-gated) access, even after a page reload. In particular, the API does not grant random access to the file system and certain system folders are blocked by default.

Reviewer 2: Interesting that you went with the alternative notation in that @tomayac as suggested!

> The first productivity-related API is the [File System Access API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/File_System_Access_API). Web apps could already open files from the file system via `input[type=file]`: In a file picker, the user can choose one or more files to give the web application access to. Also, they could already save files to the Downloads folder via `a[download]`. The File System Access API adds support for additional use cases: Opening and modifying directories, saving files to a location specified by the user, and overwriting files that were opened by them. It is also possible to persist file handles to IndexedDB to allow for continued (permission-gated) access, even after a page reload. In particular, the API does not grant random access to the file system and certain system folders are blocked by default.

Author: Done!

### Write Access
When calling the [`showSaveFilePicker()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/showSaveFilePicker) method on the global `window` object, the browser will show the operating system's file picker. The method takes an optional options object where you can specify which file types are allowed for saving (`types`, default: all types), and whether the user can disable this filter via an "accept all" option (`excludeAcceptAllOption`, default: `false`). When the user successfully picks a file from the local file system, you will receive its handle. With the help of the `createWritable()` method on the handle, you can access a stream writer. In the following example, this writer writes the text `hello world` to the file and closes it afterward.

```js
const handle = await window.showSaveFilePicker({
  types: [{
    description: 'PNG files',
    accept: { 'image/png': ['.png'] }
  }],
  excludeAcceptAllOption: true
});
const writable = await handle.createWritable();
await writable.write('hello world');
await writable.close();
```

> ### Read Access

Author: Chrome Platform Status data shows that read is more used (= page loads) than write ([Read](https://chromestatus.com/metrics/feature/timeline/popularity/2369)/[Write](https://chromestatus.com/metrics/feature/timeline/popularity/2370)). In last year's chapter, writing was used more. I'd like to stick with addressing the writing first. I find it easier to follow how I can read something I've written before.

> ### Read Access

Reviewer 2: Absolutely fine. Resolving.

```js
const handle = await window.showDirectoryPicker();
```

The File System Access API is only available on Chromium-based browsers and desktop systems. Fortunately, the web platform offers fallback approaches to provide similar functionality on mobile devices and other browsers as well: With the `input<a hreflang="en" href="https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/browser-fs-access">type=file]` control, it's possible to give a web application access to the binary contents of a file. The `a[download]` mechanism allows users to download a dynamically generated file to their Downloads folder. Developers can also use the Google-developed library [browser-fs-access</a> that uses the File System Access API if present and otherwise falls back to the alternative implementation.

{{ figure_markup(
caption="Mobile websites use the File System Access API",

> content="7,491,840",

Author: Yes. :D

const blob = new Blob(['hello world'], { type: 'text/plain' });
await navigator.clipboard.write([
  new ClipboardItem({
    [blob.type]: blob,
  }),
]);
```

### Read Access
Similar to copying data to the clipboard, there are two methods to paste data back from the clipboard: First, another shorthand method called [`readText()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Clipboard/readText) that returns plain text from the clipboard. Using the [`read()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Clipboard/read) method, you access all items in the clipboard in the data formats supported by the browser.

```js
const item = await navigator.clipboard.readText();
const items = await navigator.clipboard.read();
```

The browser may show a permission prompt or a different UI for privacy reasons before granting the website access to the clipboard contents. The Async Clipboard API is available in Chrome, Edge, and Safari. Firefox only supports the `writeText()` method.

{{ figure_markup(
caption="Mobile websites use the Async Clipboard API",
content="618,062",
classes="big-number",
sheets_gid="2077755325",
sql_file="fugu.sql"
)
}}

> With 560,359 (8.91%) desktop and 618,062 (8.25%) mobile sites, the Async Clipboard API (`writeText()` method) is one of the most used Fugu APIs. The `write()` method is used on 1,180 desktop and 1,227 mobile sites. The commercial website <a hreflang="en" href="https://clippingmagic.com/">Clipping Magic</a> allows you to remove the background of an image with the help of an AI algorithm. Just paste an image from the clipboard, and the website will remove its background.

Author: Same here, the Async Clipboard API is used in the same YouTube script (https://www.youtube.com/s/player/8d287e4d/player_ias.vflset/en_US/base.js).

.cc @tomayac

```js
await navigator.share({
  files: picturesArray,
  title: 'Holiday pictures',
  text: 'Our holiday in the French Alps'
})
```

The Web Share API is supported by Safari (iOS, macOS), and Chrome and Edge (Windows, Chrome OS). It's currently a <a hreflang="en" href="https://www.w3.org/TR/web-share/">Working Draft</a> at the Web Applications Working Group. This is one of the first stages of the track to becoming a W3C Recommendation.

{{ figure_markup(
caption="Mobile websites use the Web Share API",
content="642,507",
classes="big-number",
sheets_gid="2077755325",
sql_file="fugu.sql"
)
}}

> With 566,049 (9.00%) desktop and 642,507 (8.58%) mobile sites, the Web Share API is the most used Fugu API. For example, the <a hreflang="en" href="https://beta.paintz.app/">beta version of the PaintZ app</a> allows you to share a drawing with another locally installed application via the save dialog.

Author: I checked the first 10 sites from the sample URLs, and it appears that the high number can be traced back to a YouTube script (https://www.youtube.com/s/player/8d287e4d/player_ias.vflset/en_US/base.js) that is included when embedding a YouTube video. When the user clicks the Share button in the player, the Web Share API is called (if present).

.cc @tomayac

description='Screenshot showing a drawing application with an overlay of the built-in messaging application that received the drawing from the app.',
width=676,
height=419
) }}

## URL Handlers and Declarative Link Capturing
The last two productivity-related capabilities described in this chapter are URL Handlers and Declarative Link Capturing, additional methods for even deeper integration with the operating system.

### URL Handling
With the help of <a hreflang="en" href="https://web.dev/pwa-url-handler/">URL Handling</a>, PWAs can register themselves as handlers for certain URL schemes upon installation, e.g., for `https://*.example.com`. When the user opens a URL that matches this scheme, the installed PWA will open instead of a new browser tab. URL Handling is an extension of the <a hreflang="en" href="https://www.w3.org/TR/appmanifest/">Web Application Manifest</a>, a file that contains metadata for web applications. To register for URL schemes, you have to add the `url_handlers` property to your manifest. This property takes an array containing objects with an `origin` property.

```json
{
  "url_handlers": [{
    "origin": "https://*.example.com"
  }]
}
```

> If you want to register for origins other than your web app's origin, you need to <a hreflang="en" href="https://web.dev/pwa-url-handler/#the-web-app-origin-association-file">verify your ownership of them</a>. The capability is at a relatively early stage: It's only supported on Chrome and Edge on the desktop. URL Handling is currently available as an Origin Trial. This means that the capability is not generally available yet. Instead, developers need to register for an Origin Trial token first and deliver this token along with their website to use this capability. You can find more information in the <a hreflang="en" href="https://github.com/GoogleChrome/OriginTrials/blob/gh-pages/developer-guide.md">Origin Trials Guide for Web Developers</a>.

Author: Rephrased the sentence as suggested, added the link, and left the last sentence in place. Please double check.

{{ figure_markup(
caption="Desktop websites use URL Handling",

> content="44",

Author: Yes, desktop makes more sense for those APIs. The File System Access API, for example, is currently only supported on desktop. I've changed all big numbers to show the usage on desktop sites.

classes="big-number",
sheets_gid="2077755325",
sql_file="fugu.sql"
)
}}

44 desktop and 41 mobile websites make use of URL Handling. For example, the Pinterest PWA registers itself as a URL handler for the different Pinterest origins (e.g., `*.pinterest.com` and `*.pinterest.de`) on installation.

### Declarative Link Capturing
With the help of <a hreflang="en" href="https://web.dev/declarative-link-capturing/">Declarative Link Capturing</a>, you can further control how PWAs should behave when the user opens them. For instance, an office application may want to open another window for a new document, while a music player wants to keep its single window open. Therefore, Declarative Link Capturing defines three different modes:

1. `none` does not capture the link at all (the default)
2. `new-client` opens a new window for the PWA
3. `existing-client-navigate`  navigates an existing client to the new URL or opens a new window if no client exists

> Declarative Link Capturing also is an extension of the Web Application Manifest. To use it, you need to add the `capture_links` property to your manifest. This property takes a string or an array of strings matching the three modes from above. If you use an array, the browser will fall back to the next entry if it doesn't support a particular mode.

Author: It's explained in the URL handling section directly above. I added an additional link there.

> ```json

Author: Done!

## Hardware APIs
The next set of capabilities focuses on hardware-related APIs. In Chromium-based browsers, there are many APIs to access hardware interfaces, including but not limited to USB, Bluetooth, and serial devices. Furthermore, the Generic Sensor API allows you to read from device sensors. All capabilities discussed in this section are only available on Chromium-based browsers and on systems where the respective hardware interface or sensor is present.

### Web USB API
The <a hreflang="en" href="https://web.dev/usb/">Web USB API</a> allows developers to access USB devices without any drivers or third-party applications. For instance, this capability is interesting for firmware updates that developers otherwise would have to implement as separate platform-specific apps for different platforms. You need to call the `navigator.usb.requestDevice()` method to access USB devices. It takes an object which defines filters for the list of all connected USB devices. You need to specify the `vendorId` at least. The browser shows a device picker where the user can choose a matching device. From there, you can begin a device session.

```js
try {

>   const device = await navigator.usb.requestDevice({ filters: [{ vendorId: 0x8086 }] });

Author: Done!

  console.log(device.productName);
  console.log(device.manufacturerName);
} catch (err) {
  console.log(err);
}
```

{{ figure_markup(
caption="Desktop websites use Web USB",
content="182",
classes="big-number",
sheets_gid="2077755325",
sql_file="fugu.sql"
)
}}

The API is generally available on Chromium-based browsers since version 61. 182 desktop and 155 mobile sites use this API, for example, the PWA <a hreflang="en" href="https://app.vysor.io/#/">Vysor</a> that allows you to mirror the screen of an Android or iOS device—all without installing any additional software on your computer.

{{ figure_markup(
image="web-usb.png",
caption='The Vysor PWA uses Web USB to connect to USB devices and project their screen contents onto the desktop',
description='Screenshot showing a website with a modal dialog open listing the connected USB devices.',
width=699,
height=440
) }}

### Web Bluetooth API

> The <a hreflang="en" href="https://web.dev/bluetooth/">Web Bluetooth API</a> allows you to communicate with nearby Bluetooth Low Energy devices using the Generic Attribute Profile (GATT). To find a matching device, call the `navigator.bluetooth.requestDevice()` method. In the following example, the list of Bluetooth devices is filtered by whether they offer a battery service or not. The browser shows a device picker where the user can choose a Bluetooth device. Afterward, you can connect to the remote device and gather the data.

Author: BLE needs to be in caps: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bluetooth_Low_Energy

```js
try {
  const port = await navigator.serial.requestPort();
  await port.open({ baudRate: 9600 });
} catch (err) {
  console.log(err);
}
```

{{ figure_markup(
caption="Desktop websites use the Web Serial API",
content="15",
classes="big-number",
sheets_gid="2077755325",
sql_file="fugu.sql"
)
}}

This capability is relatively new, as it shipped with Chromium 89 in March 2021. Currently, 15 desktop and 14 mobile sites use the Web Serial API, including the <a hreflang="en" href="https://duino.app/">Duino App</a> that allows you to develop programs for Arduino and ESP microcontrollers right in your browser. They are compiled on a remote server and then uploaded to a connected board via the Web Serial API.

{{ figure_markup(
image="web-serial.png",
caption='The Duino app is a web-based IDE that uses Web Serial to upload programs to Arduino microcontrollers',
description='Screenshot showing a web-based code editor application compiling code.',
width=699,
height=440
) }}

### Generic Sensor API

> Finally, the <a hreflang="en" href="https://web.dev/generic-sensor/">Generic Sensor API</a> allows you to read sensor data from the device's sensors, such as the accelerometer, gyroscope, or orientation sensor. To access a sensor, you create a new instance of a sensor class, e.g., `Accelerometer`. The constructor takes a configuration object with the requested frequency. By attaching to the `onreading` and `onerror` events, you can get notified for updated sensor values, or errors respectively. Finally, you need to start the reading by calling the `start()` method.

Author: It's about the device's sensors (i.e., accelerometer, or gyroscope), I hoped the first sentence would make that clear. Would it help to rephrase it like this maybe?

```suggestion
While the previous APIs provide access to data transmission interfaces, the <a hreflang="en" href="https://web.dev/generic-sensor/">Generic Sensor API</a> allows you to read sensor data from the device's sensors, such as the accelerometer, gyroscope, or orientation sensor. To access a sensor, you create a new instance of a sensor class, e.g., `Accelerometer`. The constructor takes a configuration object with the requested frequency. By attaching to the `onreading` and `onerror` events, you can get notified for updated sensor values, or errors respectively. Finally, you need to start the reading by calling the `start()` method.
```

> Finally, the <a hreflang="en" href="https://web.dev/generic-sensor/">Generic Sensor API</a> allows you to read sensor data from the device's sensors, such as the accelerometer, gyroscope, or orientation sensor. To access a sensor, you create a new instance of a sensor class, e.g., `Accelerometer`. The constructor takes a configuration object with the requested frequency. By attaching to the `onreading` and `onerror` events, you can get notified for updated sensor values, or errors respectively. Finally, you need to start the reading by calling the `start()` method.

Reviewer 2: Ah I got you. So it's like devices and sensors, rather than direct serial port access to get to those devices.

Hmmmm.... can't think of a better way of phrasing it to be honest. Think I prefer your original wording. Will just leave it as is and resolve this.

1. The website <a hreflang="en" href="https://system-scanner.net/">System Scanner</a> uses nine APIs: It shows an overview of the system information exposed by the browser, including sensor information provided by the Generic Sensor API.
1. Eight sites use eight Fugu APIs: One of them is the aforementioned <a hreflang="en" href="https://excalidraw.com/">Excalidraw</a>, an online drawing tool for creating drawings in a hand-drawn style. As a traditional productivity app, it benefits from the new capabilities.

Some websites from the result set are Internet forums based on <a hreflang="en" href="https://www.discourse.org/">Discourse</a>. This forum software supports a total of eight Fugu APIs. Discourse-based forums are installable and support, among others, the Badging API to show the amount of unread notifications.

> The results also include sites that aren't proactively using the APIs. For example, some sites ship library code that could theoretically access the capabilities. Some sites check for the presence of Fugu APIs to determine the user's browser.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand that last sentence? Do you mean they are using these APIs to fingerprint the user? Is that a risk of these APIs? Should we discuss that? Should we link to the Privacy chapter?

Also how does this work with the aforementioned need of interaction to use these APIs? Or is it allowed to test if the API exists (`if genericAPI in window`) without needing that interaction?

On a similar note to any of these need permission prompts before using? I would hope so! Should that be mentioned somewhere?

Author: > I don't understand that last sentence? Do you mean they are using these APIs to fingerprint the user? Is that a risk of these APIs? Should we discuss that? Should we link to the Privacy chapter?

Some of the sites I've seen test for the presence of certain APIs to determine the browser brand without looking at the user agent. I don't think this is considered fingerprinting. All specification texts contain a section about security and privacy considerations, we could mention that in the introduction. And yes, we can link to the privacy chapter, looks like they have a section on permissions.

> Also how does this work with the aforementioned need of interaction to use these APIs? Or is it allowed to test if the API exists (if genericAPI in window) without needing that interaction?

All APIs presented in this chapter can be detected without user interaction.

> On a similar note do any of these need permission prompts before using? I would hope so! Should that be mentioned somewhere?

Most APIs have implicit permission prompts (e.g., file picker, device picker, …), and it's always noted in the section about the API. Access to motion and light sensor APIs is granted by default.

Reviewer 2: OK let's leave as is. Re-reading it it's fine. Resolving.

## Conclusion
Capabilities help move the web forward by unlocking more and more use cases for developers. As this chapter shows, developers use the new web platform APIs to build powerful applications. In contrast to their platform-specific counterparts, those applications don't necessarily need to be installed to the system and don't require any additional third-party runtimes or plug-ins to work. They run on any platform that can run a powerful browser.

> One example of this concept working is Visual Studio Code. This application has always been web-based, but it still relied on platform-specific application wrappers like Electron. Thanks to capabilities like the File System Access API, Microsoft was able to release the application as a browser application (<a hreflang="en" href="https://vscode.dev">vscode.dev</a>) in October 2021. Almost all features work here, except debugging or terminal access, since there is no capability for this yet.

Reviewer 2: Maybe hint at the future?

```suggestion
One example of this concept working is Visual Studio Code. This application has always been web-based, but it still relied on platform-specific application wrappers like Electron. Thanks to capabilities like the File System Access API, Microsoft was able to release the application as a browser application (<a hreflang="en" href="https://vscode.dev">vscode.dev</a>) in October 2021. Almost all features work here, except debugging or terminal access, since there is no capability for this (yet!).
```

Author: I don't expect these APIs to land in the near future, but yes, we can go with that.

> Another example is <a hreflang="en" href="https://photoshop.adobe.com">Adobe Photoshop</a>, which was also released as a web application in October 2021. Photoshop also uses several of the capabilities presented here, as well as WebAssembly, to migrate existing code to the web. Thus, the Capabilities project paves the way for entire categories of applications to finally migrate to the web.

Reviewer 2: Photoshop got most of the hype, but it's also Illustrator.

Also worth linking to this article?: https://web.dev/ps-on-the-web/

Also worth mentioning that Adobe don't plan to stop there?: https://web.dev/ps-on-the-web/#what's-next-for-adobe-on-the-web

### Project Fugu

The <a hreflang="en" href="https://www.chromium.org/teams/web-capabilities-fugu">Capabilities Project</a> (codename Fugu) is a joint effort by Microsoft, Intel, Google, and other Chromium contributors. It tries to bridge the gap between platform-specific applications and web apps by designing and implementing new powerful web platform APIs in a secure and privacy-preserving manner (see also the [Privacy](../privacy) chapter). As capabilities unlock more and more use cases, they lay the path for entire new application categories to finally make the shift to the web (e.g., IDEs, image editors, or office applications).

<figure>

> <blockquote>Project Fugu 🐡 is an effort to close gaps in the web's capabilities enabling new classes of applications to run on the web. […] APIs that Project Fugu is delivering enable new experiences on the web while preserving the web's core benefits of security, low-friction, and cross-platform delivery. All Project Fugu API proposals are made in the open and on the standards track.</blockquote>

Reviewer 2: Never seen that `[...]` usage before?

```suggestion
<blockquote>Project Fugu 🐡 is an effort to close gaps in the web's capabilities enabling new classes of applications to run on the web… APIs that Project Fugu is delivering enable new experiences on the web while preserving the web's core benefits of security, low-friction, and cross-platform delivery. All Project Fugu API proposals are made in the open and on the standards track.</blockquote>
```

Reviewer 3: The brackets are used to show that the original text was elided, as opposed to the original text literally containing the ellipsis.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I've always used a literal elipse for that under the assumption that always indicated parts of quotes.

Though I have used brackets when actually doing an edit to a quote:

> Rick said "The brackets are used to show that the original text was [edited], as opposed to the original text literally containing the ellipsis."

But anyway, happy to leave as is, if it's a known convention.

Reviewer 2: https://www.thepunctuationguide.com/ellipses.html#single-sentence

Reviewer 2: Seems like it's a controversial topic in editor circles:
https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/5972/how-are-bracket-ellipsis-used-in-quotations

The things you discover working on this project!

The Google Style Guide (that we use) doesn't seem to mandate square brackets: https://developers.google.com/style/ellipses?hl=en#ellipses-in-text

So I'd vote to remove them.

{{ figure_markup(
image="generic-sensor-api.png",
caption='The Generic Sensor API can be used to rotate 3D models according to the orientation of the device',
description='Two screenshots of a cell phone showing a 3D model. In the second screenshot, the 3D model has been rotated because the orientation of the device has changed.',
width=808,
height=822
) }}

## Sites using the most capabilities
The analysis also identified the websites using the most capabilities from the HTTP Archive data set. The detection script is capable of identifying 30 Fugu APIs in total. So let's give an award to the websites that use the most Fugu APIs. The excitement is building!

{{ figure_markup(
image="fugu-podium.png",
caption='The three websites that use the most Fugu APIs',

> description='The image shows a winner's podium with screenshots of the three websites that use the most Fugu APIs.',

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description="The image shows a winner's podium with screenshots of the three websites that use the most Fugu APIs.'"
```
